Introduction
This presentation will focus on how three different news sources report on the Olympics 2022 in Beijing. The three articles were published in Sports Illustrated, ESPN, and CNN. The focus of the three pieces is on the closing ceremony of the Winter Olympics, which took place in Beijing. The Olympic games are a major event in sports on the global level because it allows athletes from many different states to compete and showcase their skills and potential. Therefore, by reviewing this event and how different news sources write about it, one can compare the different approaches to reporting and varying political and social positions.
The first news source is Sports Illustrated, and the article is titled “How to Watch Winter Olympic Closing Ceremony: Live Stream, TV Channel, Start Time” and written by Carter (2022). In this article, the author writes about the Olympics’ clothing ceremony with a focus on the American athletes who have won medals and will be present at this ceremony. Also, the author provides some details regarding the time of streaming and the news channels where one will be able to watch the ceremony. This article is focused on glorifying the American team and on emphasizing the winners, such as Elana Meyers Taylor.
The second article covering the topic of the Winter Olympics closing ceremony is the one published by ESPN. The author is Hamilton (2022), and the title of this article is “Winter Olympics 2022: Highlights from the closing ceremony in Beijing.” This article mainly focuses on social media’s reaction to the games and their closing ceremony, which is shown in Picture 1. Hamilton (2022) also mentioned the controversy surrounding these games due to the ongoing pandemic that continues to affect people’s lives. Hence, this article is more complex when compared to the first one and covers a broader range of topics, including the social and political factors linked to the Olympic Games 2022.
The final news source that also reported on the closing ceremony of the Olympic Games 2022 is CNN. This article is written by the CNN team and contains little text and a plethora of images that describe the final ceremony. The title of this article is “In pictures: The Olympics closing ceremony in Beijing” (2022), which explains the focus on the photographs as opposed to the text. An example of this is shown in Picture 3 above. Before showcasing the pictures, the authors briefly discuss what the Olympic games are, their purpose, the previous Olympics that were affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, and other background information.
Statistics
The statistics support several features that are associated with both the Olympics and globalization. The 2022 Olympics occurred in the three regions of Beijing, Yanqing, and Zhangjiakou with 12 competition venues. This introduced viewers and athletes to several locations and cultural heritage spots of which they were likely previously unaware. The events were widely broadcast with as many as 24 official rights-holding broadcasting companies present throughout the Olympics. More than 300 sublicensees were also able to depict and discuss the event which allowed for the variety of reporting and news releases throughout the sources we observed. Over 1952 accredited press staff members were present, with 1491 of which were from non-domestic organizations. 520 news outlets, and 602 photographers operated during the events. As such, the statistics illustrate the extent to which globalization has been ingrained in the reporting of such massive global events as the Olympics. While news outlets have specific needs and views and report regarding their nations, they are still entwined and involved in the overall progression of the event.
2022 Olympics Closing Ceremony