Program Background
Head Start is among crucial educational investments in children, families, and communities. The Head Start Project was initially launched back in 1965 as a comprehensive program of child development (Administration for Children & Families, 2021). Over the past several decades, it has offered a window of opportunity for lifelong success for more than thirty-seven million low-income and vulnerable children and their families across the United States. The program has remained strong in the face of shifting political, social, and economic climates because of the dedication to the continuous improvement of services delivered to children and families and addressed the changing needs of communities.
Considering the great influence and the contribution of Head Start programs across the country, multiple other community-focused early education centers have been developed. Henry Booth House is among such programs, the mission of which is to improve families’ quality of life in the context of the culturally and economically diverse communities of Chicago. The organization provides comprehensive and integrated early childhood learning, social services, and family healthcare. Known and HBH, the non-profit was initially established in the second-to-last year of the nineteenth century by the Chicago Ethical Humanist Society. The purpose of the establishment was to work on the dedication to ethical principles of child care, the education of underserved populations, and the improvement of life quality.
The long history of HBH has allowed the organization to develop extensive experience of improving the well-being of families for over more than a hundred years (Cause IQ, 2021). This experience has enabled HBH to update and expand its vision and mission, reaching the statement of serving culturally diverse services in such areas as the Head Start Learning Program, Early Head Start, Family Health, WIC, and Doula training programs. The comprehensive range of services that the organization offers to the public of Chicago is intended to focus on the holistic development of younger generations in the span of Prenatal to five years.
Children who are aged between three to five years old are eligible for Head Start Services provided by the HBH, while pregnant women and children from birth to three years old fall under the eligibility of Early Head Start services. Children and families who have attained the homeless status, are in foster care or receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) can also apply for services provided by HBH. As a rule, the eligibility for Head Start program participation is identified by the staff, while some families may have eligibility if they are recognized to be at the federal poverty level or below. Besides, some grantees enroll a portion of children from families with income above the Poverty Guidelines as everyone is encourage to apply. The specific circumstances and environmental influences are usually considered when it comes to deciding to include children and families in the programs carried out by HBH.
The Near South center-based program is open five working days a week from seven in the morning to six at night. It has attained its license through the City of Chicago Department of Children (DFSS) and Family Services and the Department of Children and Family Services (DCSF). The children services division of the DFSS is dedicated to helping the youngest citizens of Chicago to make the most of their lives and potential for future development. The accreditation by such bodies entails adherence to the Administrative Code. For example, it is expected that locations where childhood programs are carried out, have sufficient indoor space. Specifically, there shall be “a minimum of 35 square feet of activity area per child in centers for children two years of age and older […] This space is also exclusive of administrative space, storage areas, storage areas, bathrooms […]” (ILGA, n.d.). Therefore, per square footage, the program can serve thirty-seven children. One classroom can serve twenty four-to-five-year-olds while another can serve seventeen three-to-four-year-olds.
Because of the high demands and expectations of the programs, the team at HBH Head Start must have a high qualification to meet the federal and state accreditation requirements for the Head Start and Pre-Kindergarten programs. The qualifications of the team are highly diverse, ranging from Associates of Art in Early Childhood Education to Master of Arts in Early Childhood Education. The program uses a team of three teachers per classroom, which means that the teacher-child ratio is 1:10, thus allowing for regular interactions between teachers and students and the individualization of activities. It is notable that the Near South program was deemed eligible for an ExceleRate Circle of Quality, which shows the commitment of the organization to providing high-quality care to children and families in need.
Recruiting, Selecting and Orienting Staff